[MUSIC]
>> Kyle: Another thing we might want to do
with a list of values is to compose those
values together.
Remember I said earlier, so
I want to remind you, we're
not talking when I say list composition,
I don't mean composing two lists together.
We have a method for
that it's called concurrent.
But that isn't as traditionally thought
of from a functional perspective.
So what we're talking about here is
composition of items within a list.
Either a full composition,
which is what most people mean by it or,
sometimes it's just a partial composition.
That's also valid.
And that goes by the name in
functional programming of
typically it's called a reduce.
So what are some examples of
a reduction that we might do,
a composition that we
might do across a list?
See I have a list of numbers,
remember I had a transform where I
multiplied all those numbers by 2?
What if now I wanted to say I want
to take this list of numbers and
add all of them together.
I want the summation of
all the items in my list.
You can express the summation of
items in a list as a reduction,
it is a composition of values.
Now, what do I mean by that?
I'm not trying to be too terminology heavy
here, composition is when I take value
A and value B, and
I smush them together to get value C.
Whatever that means.
So for numbers it might be adding,
or it might be multiplying, or
it might be dividing.
For functions it might be passing
one function into another function.
For promises it might be chaining
one promise off of another promise.
There's a nearly infinite number of ways
that you could think about taking any
two arbitrary values and
composing them into some third value.
Again for illustration purposes we are
using numbers, but this is a more general
concept, composition of values, and
we turn to the reduce function.
Now, just as a quick heads up,
the reduce function
is more complex than the previous two,
that's why I did the first two.
It's more complex than the first two,
and it is possible to use
reduce in a non-pure way.
In fact,
it's possible to do all of these, but
it's kinda easy to do non-pure
programming with the reduce function.
So, it's a tool that has more power to it,
but also a tool that you have to use
responsibly if you want
to functionally program.
So assuming that you're trying to be
functionally program minded about it, or
as I call it functional lite programming,
assuming that's your goal,
you have to be a little bit more
careful about how you use it.
So list composition or reducing,
what would that look like?
Well I could have a predicate
function like mult.
And importantly here, because I'm doing a
composition, that means I need two values.
So I'm gonna have an initial value,
which I'm calling x here and
another value I'm calling y.
Now I've named them x and y because
in the problem domain of multiplying
we usually think about x times y.
But if your problem domain
was something different,
you might name those
parameters differently.
The most common name for those parameters
to the predicate that's used in
the composed option or
the reduce function.
The most common name is they call
the first one the accumulator.
And the second one, the value.
So let me explain how that works.
By way of looking at the implementation
of it that I have here called compose.
You notice compose actually
takes three parameters, not two.
Takes an array, it takes a predicate.
But it also takes an initial value.
Why?
Because this is still going to be called
against every element in our list.
But the first element in the list needs to
have something to compose with doesn't it?
We haven't done any composition yet.
And we're gonna pass it into a composition
we need to pass something else in.
You know what we're gonna pass?
An initial value.
And then those would be composed together
and now we have a running total,
which is why this is oftentimes
referred to as an accumulator.
We have a value now that was the result
of the first composition, and
then we have the second item in the list,
so we take those two and pass them in.
And those two get composed.
And now we have this as our value and
the third item in the list and
those two get composed,
so that's how it works.
That's why we need an initial value.
What would the initial value,
what the most appropriate initial
value would be for summation?
Zero.
What would be the most appropriate
initial value for multiplication?
One.
Everybody see why?
Cuz those are both the identity
values in those operations.
Zero doesn't make a change
to this summation,
one doesn't make a change to
the multiplication or the division.
So, great, excellent.
What about a function composition?
What would be a good initial function?
A which returns everything
back that it got.
So the more complex your value types,
the more you have to think carefully
about what would my initial value be.
If I were doing a composition of promises,
like chaining them together,
what would my initial value be?
An initially resolved promise,
for example.
So when we're thinking
about composition you
have to also think about the initial
value, that's an extra complication.
I've got my total here,
which because I'm doing math,
I can just do mathematics here.
I would need to have a more
complex implementation if I were
doing something non-mathematic.
Well maybe not a different implementation.
But I'd probably call
the variables different.
I wouldn't call it total or whatever.
But you'll notice that I call
the fn function with whatever
the current value of total
is plus the new value.
And then that's what
gets assigned to total.
So that's how I do that whole compose,
compose, compose thing.
And then I return total back out.
So down I'm calling it on line 12.
I just passed in the array one,
two, three, four, five.
My predicate mults and I start with one
because that's the most appropriate
initial value for this operation.
It's important to know that this is
what we would call a full reduction or
a full composition.
Meaning that we started out with
a list and what do we end up with?
Something very much not list.
In this case a number.
It's interesting to note that the
reduction here when it's a full reduction
like that it's not really
chainable with the other
functional programming things is it?
Here's where we start to see the nit picks
that functional programmers have because
now we don't have.
Now we have a breakdown in the consistency
of our compositional pattern because
if you needed to do some other mathematic
operation like a map on this and
the end result was a number, you can't
just call map directly off of it.
You're gonna have to take that and
put it into an array and
then call map on the array or something.
It's just some weird inconsistency.
Usually your reduction,
especially if it's a full one,
usually that's the last
step in your chain anyway.
So it's usually not a big deal.
But there have been places
where I've had this issue.
So the other way to think about it,
I don't have a code snippet for this, but
it is possible that a reduce
is not a full reduce.
In other words, the end result of your
reduction might just be another list.
>> Kyle: An example, we're gonna come back
to this later, but while you're thinking
about it, an example, what if I wanted
to perform a unique operation on a list?
What if I wanted to filter
out the list and say,
this list needs to only
have unique values?
I need to turn it from a list into a set,
basically.
Well, we couldn't use filter.
Why couldn't we use filter?
>> Kyle: What was the one characteristic I
said about how filter gets used to solve
problems?
Remember, filter can only make its
decision based upon the value itself.
That's the appropriate way of using it.
There's ways to bastardize it, of course,
but that's the appropriate way of doing
it, is making a decision
based on the value itself.
Well, we can't unique an array based
on knowing the value itself, can we?
We need something more context.
So, actually, uniquing could be
implemented more effectively.
And more traditionally with the reduce,
because what we could do is,
our running accumulator
could be an empty list.
The initial value could be an empty list,
and
we could stick something in the list
only if it's not already in the list.
So we could run through the entire
original list looking at values.
And every time we're about to put
one into the new list we ask,
is it not in the list yet,
is it not in the set yet.
That's an example of uniquing.
So that's what I would
call a partial reduction.
Because the end result is still the list.
But it's not a one to one mapping.
It wasn't a filtering based
upon one individual value,
it was something more complex.
That's what I meant earlier when I
said reduce is way more complex.
More powerful but
there's also a bunch of ways that
you can use it in very impure ways.
So, you have to be careful about that.